WGCNA Part 1: Set up (#358)
AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples: 04-advanced-topics/network-analysis_rnaseq_01_wgcna.Rmd

---
title: "WGCNA - RNA-seq"
author: "CCDL for ALSF"

> date: "October 2020"

Author: What month is it anyway??? Lol

```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order.

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>%
  dplyr::select(metadata$refinebio_accession_code)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$refinebio_accession_code)
```

### Prepare data for `DESeq2`

There are two things we neeed to do to prep our expression data for DESeq2. 

First, we need to make sure all of the values in our data are converted to integers as required by a `DESeq2` function we will use later.

Then, we need to filter out the genes that have not been expressed or that have low expression counts. 
This is recommended by [WGCNA docs for RNA-seq data](https://horvath.genetics.ucla.edu/html/CoexpressionNetwork/Rpackages/WGCNA/faq.html#:~:text=Can%20WGCNA%20be%20used%20to,Yes.&text=Whether%20one%20uses%20RPKM%2C%20FPKM,were%20processed%20the%20same%20way.).
Removing low count genes can also help improve your WGCNA results. 
We are going to do some pre-filtering to keep only genes with 50 or more reads in total across the samples.

```{r}
# The next DESeq2 functions need the values to be converted to integers
df <- round(df) %>%

>   # The next steps require a data frame and round() spits back a matrix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # The next steps require a data frame and round() returns a matrix
```

Author: I guess people don't like "spit". Makes sense.

  as.data.frame() %>%
  # Only keep rows that have total counts above the cutoff

>   dplyr::filter(apply(., 1, sum) >= 50) %>%

Reviewer: Why not stick with `rowSums()` here? I think it is more clear (and faster!).
```suggestion
  dplyr::filter(rowSums(.) >= 50) %>%
```

Author: I always forget about rowSums! Definitely!

  # Bring out rownames and store as their own column
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Gene")
```

## Create a DESeqDataset

We will be using the `DESeq2` package for [normalizing and transforming our data](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/03-rnaseq/00-intro-to-rnaseq.html#deseq2-transformation-methods), which requires us to format our data into a `DESeqDataSet` object.
We turn the data frame (or matrix) into a [`DESeqDataSet` object](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/03-rnaseq/00-intro-to-rnaseq.html#02_About_DESeq2) and specify which variable labels our experimental groups using the [`design` argument](http://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html#multi-factor-designs) [@Love2014].
In this chunk of code, we will not provide a specific model to the `design` argument because we are not performing a differential expression analysis.

```{r}
# Create a `DESeqDataSet` object
dds <- DESeqDataSetFromMatrix(
  countData = df, # Our prepped data frame with counts
  colData = metadata, # Data frame with annotation for our samples
  design = ~1, # Here we are not specifying a model

>   tidy = TRUE # Our first column is not counts, this warns the function

Reviewer: If we skip the `rownnames_to_column()` above, we could skip this, right? I don't know which I prefer, honestly, but it's an option.

Author: Good point! I like getting rid of it. Seems more clean.

---
title: "WGCNA - RNA-seq"
author: "CCDL for ALSF"
date: "October 2020"
output:   
  html_notebook:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    number_sections: true
---

# Purpose of this analysis

In this example, we use weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) to identify co-expressed gene modules [@Langfelder2008]. 
WGCNA uses a series of correlations to determine what genes are expressed together in your data set. 
This is a fairly intuitive approach to gene network analysis which is pretty widely used for microarray (as well as RNA-seq). 

> As output, WGCNA gives groups of co-expressed genes as well as an eigengene x sample matrix (where eigengenes are [eigenvalues](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/linear-algebra/alternate-bases/eigen-everything/v/linear-algebra-introduction-to-eigenvalues-and-eigenvectors) but are the collapsed information for a group of co-expressed genes) [@KhanAcademy; @Langfelder2007]. 

Author: Eigengenes are egenvalues but with genes' data. I'll take another whack at describing this better.

If you have troubles finding a `power` parameter that yields a sufficient R^2 even after applying a stringent cutoff, you may want to look into using a different dataset. 

***

<!-- Do not delete this line --> <a name="analysis" style="padding-top:56px;margin-top:-56px;">&nbsp;</a>

# Identifying co-expression gene modules with WGCNA - RNA-seq

## Install libraries

See our Getting Started page with [instructions for package installation](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#what-you-need-to-install) for a list of the other software you will need, as well as more tips and resources.

We will be using `DESeq2` to normalize and transform our RNA-seq data before running WGCNA, so we will need to install that [@Love2014].

Of course, we will need the `WGCNA` package [@Langfelder2008].
But `WGCNA` also requires a package called `impute` that is sometimes has trouble installing so we recommend installing that first. 

> Lastly, we will be creating a `sina` plot which we will need a `ggplot2` companion package for, called `ggforce`. 

Author: It does, it just won't be until Part 3's PR that you see where its used

> Lastly, we will be creating a `sina` plot which we will need a `ggplot2` companion package for, called `ggforce`. 

Author: Will add a ref though.

  # Mutate numeric variables to be integers
  dplyr::mutate_if(is.numeric, round)
```

## Create a DESeqDataset

We will be using the `DESeq2` package for [normalizing and transforming our data](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/03-rnaseq/00-intro-to-rnaseq.html#deseq2-transformation-methods), which requires us to format our data into a `DESeqDataSet` object.
We turn the data frame (or matrix) into a [`DESeqDataSet` object](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/03-rnaseq/00-intro-to-rnaseq.html#02_About_DESeq2). ) and specify which variable labels our experimental groups using the [`design` argument](http://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html#multi-factor-designs) [@Love2014].
In this chunk of code, we will not provide a specific model to the `design` argument because we are not performing a differential expression analysis.

```{r}
# Create a `DESeqDataSet` object
dds <- DESeqDataSetFromMatrix(
  countData = df, # This is the data frame with the counts values for all replicates in our dataset
  colData = metadata, # This is the data frame with the annotation data for the replicates in the counts data frame

>   design = ~1, # Here we are not specifying a model -- Replace with an appropriate design variable for your analysis

Author: I'm just making the wording shorter instead.

  tidy = TRUE
)
```

## Define a minimum counts cutoff

We want to filter out the genes that have not been expressed or that have low expression counts. 
This is recommended by [WGCNA docs for RNA-seq data](https://horvath.genetics.ucla.edu/html/CoexpressionNetwork/Rpackages/WGCNA/faq.html#:~:text=Can%20WGCNA%20be%20used%20to,Yes.&text=Whether%20one%20uses%20RPKM%2C%20FPKM,were%20processed%20the%20same%20way.).
Removing low count genes can help improve your WGCNA results. 

> We are going to do some pre-filtering to keep only genes with 10 or more reads in total across the samples.

Author: 10 was too low, (You won't see this relevant piece of this until part 2) but if you don't make your filter stringent enough you can't get a good R^2 for picking your threshold. Given that there's 175 samples, 10 is a tad low anyway, so I needed to bump it up.

---
title: "WGCNA - RNA-seq"
author: "CCDL for ALSF"
date: "November 2020"
output:   
  html_notebook:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    number_sections: true
---

# Purpose of this analysis

In this example, we use weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) to identify co-expressed gene modules [@Langfelder2008]. 
WGCNA uses a series of correlations to determine what genes are expressed together in your data set. 

> This is a fairly intuitive approach to gene network analysis which is pretty widely used for microarray (as well as RNA-seq). 

Author: Yeah, IDK that I meant it as a reason to choose it, more just a statement. But I realize that everything we say is a passive endorsement of sorts.

> This is a fairly intuitive approach to gene network analysis which is pretty widely used for microarray (as well as RNA-seq). 

Author: Will change it.

> As output, WGCNA gives groups of co-expressed genes as well as an eigengene x sample matrix (where eigengenes contain the summarized variance for a group of co-expressed genes) [@Alter2000; @Langfelder2007]. 

Author: > their eigengenes are actually a bit different

I think this may be part of my problem interpreting things, I've seen the word eigengene used in several contexts but no clear definition stated overall. 

Thanks for the clarification.

  BiocManager::install("impute")
}

if (!("WGCNA" %in% installed.packages())) {
  # Install this package if it isn't installed yet
  install.packages("WGCNA")
}

if (!("ggforce" %in% installed.packages())) {
  # Install this package if it isn't installed yet
  install.packages("ggforce")
}
```

Attach some of the packages we need for this analysis.

```{r}
# Attach the DESeq2 library
library(DESeq2)

# We will need this so we can use the pipe: %>%
library(magrittr)

# We'll need this for finding gene modules
library(WGCNA)
```

## Import and set up data

Data downloaded from refine.bio include a metadata tab separated values (TSV) file and a data TSV file.
This chunk of code will read the both TSV files and add them as data frames to your environment.

We stored our file paths as objects named `metadata_file` and `data_file` in [this previous step](#check-out-our-file-structure).

```{r}
# Read in metadata TSV file
metadata <- readr::read_tsv(metadata_file)

# Read in data TSV file
df <- readr::read_tsv(data_file) %>%
  # Here we are going to store the gene IDs as rownames so that we can have a numeric matrix to perform calculations on later

>   tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")

Author: Oh yes. I think this comment is out of date because I took this from elsewhere. 

I will look at rearranging. Dropping the `mutate_if` would probably be nice.

>   tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")

Author: OH Now I remember why I did this. `mutate_if` doesn't play well with row names, in that, it deletes them.

  tibble::rownames_to_column("Gene") %>%
  # Mutate numeric variables to be integers
  dplyr::mutate_if(is.numeric, round)
```

## Create a DESeqDataset

We will be using the `DESeq2` package for [normalizing and transforming our data](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/03-rnaseq/00-intro-to-rnaseq.html#deseq2-transformation-methods), which requires us to format our data into a `DESeqDataSet` object.
We turn the data frame (or matrix) into a [`DESeqDataSet` object](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/03-rnaseq/00-intro-to-rnaseq.html#02_About_DESeq2) and specify which variable labels our experimental groups using the [`design` argument](http://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html#multi-factor-designs) [@Love2014].
In this chunk of code, we will not provide a specific model to the `design` argument because we are not performing a differential expression analysis.

```{r}
# Create a `DESeqDataSet` object
dds <- DESeqDataSetFromMatrix(
  countData = df, # This is the data frame with the counts values for all replicates in our dataset
  colData = metadata, # This is the data frame with the annotation for our samples

>   design = ~1, # Here we are not specifying a model

Author: Will make these more terse.

  tidy = TRUE
)
```

## Define a minimum counts cutoff

We want to filter out the genes that have not been expressed or that have low expression counts. 
This is recommended by [WGCNA docs for RNA-seq data](https://horvath.genetics.ucla.edu/html/CoexpressionNetwork/Rpackages/WGCNA/faq.html#:~:text=Can%20WGCNA%20be%20used%20to,Yes.&text=Whether%20one%20uses%20RPKM%2C%20FPKM,were%20processed%20the%20same%20way.).
Removing low count genes can help improve your WGCNA results. 
We are going to do some pre-filtering to keep only genes with 50 or more reads in total across the samples.

```{r}
# Define a minimum counts cutoff and filter `DESeqDataSet` object to include
# only rows that have counts above the cutoff
genes_to_keep <- rowSums(counts(dds)) >= 50
dds <- dds[genes_to_keep, ]

> ```

Author: This is something we do in quite a few other places. I'll file an issue about re-evaluating this after I see about streamlining it here.

## Perform DESeq2 normalization and transformation

We often suggest normalizing and transforming your data for various applications and in this instance WGCNA's authors [suggest using variance stabilizing transformation before running WGCNA](https://horvath.genetics.ucla.edu/html/CoexpressionNetwork/Rpackages/WGCNA/faq.html#:~:text=Can%20WGCNA%20be%20used%20to,Yes.&text=Whether%20one%20uses%20RPKM%2C%20FPKM,were%20processed%20the%20same%20way.).  
We are going to use the `vst()` function from the `DESeq2` package to normalize and transform the data.
For more information about these transformation methods, [see here](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/03-rnaseq/00-intro-to-rnaseq.html#deseq2-transformation-methods). 

```{r}
# Normalize and transform the data in the `DESeqDataSet` object using the `vst()`
# function from the `DESEq2` R package
dds_norm <- vst(dds)
```

## Format normalized data for WGCNA

Extract the normalized counts to a matrix and transpose it so we can pass it to WGCNA. 

```{r}

> # First we are going to retrieve the normalized data from the `DESeqDataSet` object using the `assay()` function

Author: Womp womp. I think this will be a pattern for us when we work on #289

normalized_counts <- assay(dds_norm) %>%
  t() # We need to transpose this data in preparation for the `WGCNA::blockwiseModules()` function
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Looks like some additional context and code snuck into this PR (not sure if that was intentional or not).

Author: Thanks for the heads up! The parts after this are only supposed to be in part 2. Deleted it.

## Determine parameters for WGCNA

WGCNA has to decide what genes are included in which modules, but it might encounter some genes that are close to call between modules. 
By providing a soft-threshold power parameter, we can guide it on to what exponent it should compare R values for deciding between modules for a gene. 

> The "soft" part of a soft threshold just means that this will not be an absolute cutoff and WGCNA will use this parameter with some flexibility. 

Author: This I'll implement on #360.

```{r}
sft <- pickSoftThreshold(normalized_counts,
  dataIsExpr = TRUE,
  corFnc = cor,
  networkType = "signed"
)
```

This `sft` object has a lot of information, we will want to plot some of it to figure out what our `power` soft-threshold should be. 

> We have to first calculate the model fit, the R squared and make that a new variable. 

Author: It's not plain, straightforward R^2 values which is why my understanding of this starts to break down. Their tutorials almost never summarize things to explain why you are doing something, but instead just say "look at this math heavy paper for more details". This `Scale Free Topology Model Fit` thing where they multiply by the slope is from another paper that I don't understand. (Github won't let me attach, will send otherwise).

> We have to first calculate the model fit, the R squared and make that a new variable. 

Author: We should probably move this discussion over to #360

```{r}
sft_df <- data.frame(sft$fitIndices) %>%
  dplyr::mutate(model_fit = -sign(slope) * SFT.R.sq)
```

Now, let's plot the model fitting by the `power` soft threshold so we can decide on a soft-threshold for power. 

```{r}
sft_df %>%
  ggplot2::ggplot() +

>   ggplot2::geom_label(ggplot2::aes(x = Power, y = model_fit), label = sft_df$Power) +

Author: I'll also implement this over on #360.
